So we're recording now. So my name is Paul Hunt and I work for Man Cap Cymru and could
you introduce yourself please? My name is Joe Powell. I work for All Wales People First.
I'm on the autism spectrum and I lived in autism care for 11 years. And where do you
live at the moment? At the moment I live in Newport in South Wales. So obviously we've
interviewed you before under very different circumstances. Could you tell me a little
bit about what you've been up to for the last seven months? What's really interesting is
I've been working from home an awful lot. Now usually the organisation I work for, All
Wales People First, we got rid of our offices a long time ago so I didn't think it would
be much of a challenge. But I was really, really surprised because just going out to
meetings a lot doesn't happen anymore. So everything is obviously home base now. Now
in one of the interviews I did before, and I'm not sure if this was used on the film,
one of the interviews I did before with you, I was talking about how if there was a nuclear
war or a nuclear holocaust I wouldn't miss anybody and I'd be okay on my own. And I think
what I've learnt over these seven months is that I actually do need people. Maybe not
need people in the way other people need people. But actually, you know, no man is an island.
And okay, it's been easier for me than your average bear. And it's easier for me than
most people. But actually, it's had a bigger toll on me than I thought. Although I would
say largely I've been unaffected compared to most people. So I think it was a massive
learning curve for me. So in a nutshell, all I've done is just work from home. That's it.
Has it affected the way that you've accessed any social groups or not even groups necessarily
individuals you would have met up with in your spare time?
Yeah, it's really affected in a few ways, positives and negatives. The negatives obviously
are there is not physical interface. One of the members I usually meet up with and we
have a got friends and we have a meal and we do some shopping that couldn't happen.
But we've actually done more member engagement because of this. In the past, for instance,
people were learning disabilities if we were to put an idea to zoom or teams to them, they
would just turn it down and flatly refuse. I think it's a no, we can't do that. That's
not a thing. So we never went there. We always did things physically because of zoom. So
because of the COVID-19 situation, I think there's been an element of the necessities
the mother of invention. People have been forced to come out of their comfort zone and
learn things like zoom because if they don't, they're not going to be able to mix with people
and have any social interaction. And because of that, I actually think during these times,
we've got more we've got more engagement with members now than we've ever done before.
And do you think if things return back to normal, you'll do things the way you used
to or do you think you might continue online just because there's so many more people involved?
I personally would like to get a mixture of the two things. I think I think definitely the person
thinks good at regular intervals, but at the same time, you know, just so there's a human contact
and that's good for certainly for staff team morale. And I think members need to be together
in a place so they can feel that physical connection. But I think in terms of resources
and time, the fact that we've been able to do stuff on zoom that we wouldn't have dreamed before.
Also, there are times when I think it would be lovely just to have, say,
team meetings and other meetings online as well. One of the benefits, for start, you cut out the
travel time, especially people live in different parts of Wales. One of the major benefits
of of this kind of technology as well. Oh, I lost my thread then I'm so sorry.
That's all right. There was a major benefit, which I'm trying to think of this technology.
Oh, we go back to sorry, I'll just take you while I get my thread.
You're asking, would we go back? So that's a positive we can connect with more people. Oh,
yeah, yeah, yeah. Another problem we're having is with our national council in terms of physical
meetings. So our national council is our member led forum across Wales, where we bring all reps
from all counties to one place to hold me to account as chief executive and set our strategy.
There are some parts of Wales where people could have an impact on their benefits. If they seem to
travel independently, might not be able to get to our physical meetings. Now that was in the past,
a real problem for us. And before Covid, we were already looking at how do we make this happen? How
do we get people to meetings that they can't attend? We looked at one of those hubs, you know,
those Amazon hubs. Yeah. We look at those portals. But since this look at it, Zoom,
we've now realized it's much easier to do this now. It's not ideal. But if say we do go to
North Wales and people from the South can't get there, we can beam them in. If we're in the South
and people from the North can't get there, we beam them in. So it gives us that flexibility,
which we didn't have before. And so thinking away from your role in your personal life,
how has it affected how you communicate with friends or family?
It's really strange because I don't really communicate with friends or family very often
anyway, because I am such a loner. But it's still affected me an awful lot. And it's affected me in
a way you wouldn't imagine. I have more social contact now than ever before since Zoom. And this
is because of the Covid situation. Meetings, meetings that would happen quarterly, and now
were happening for a long time weekly. And then there were subgroup meetings to that and prep
meetings. So it actually put a lot of pressure on me. And I found interacting as a person with
autism online under that format, excruciatingly painful to the point where at times I just wasn't,
I was being spoken over and what have you. And I've got to be honest, in one meeting,
I really lost my temper. And I really put my foot down and said, I'm on the autism spectrum,
have some consideration. Which I hated, because I don't want to do that. I don't want to,
I'm not ashamed to have autism, but I just want to appear like any other chief exec, any other
employee of an organisation. But I got into that situation where I really got upset and annoyed.
So in terms of participation, it's harder because of Zoom, unless people hand up through the chair.
It's a nightmare for me, because I need to see the social cues. But also, I have more meetings now
than I ever did by a country mile on Zoom. And that stifles me and my ability to do stuff I really
need to do for the job. So it's actually put a lot of pressure on me in that response. And of course,
when the social things don't happen as well as I thought, I then doubt myself, I doubt my position,
I doubt who I am. Am I really qualified to do this job? So it's had a negative impact on my well-being.
There's no doubt about it. But I'd say not because of lack of social contact, but because of too much
of it. So do you think if you were the kind of person to talk to friends and family often, do you
think that and your job, how do you think you would cope with that? With my family, I never
saw them much anyway, but I used to video conference them once a week. So that was dead
straightforward. I think that wouldn't be an issue for me, to be honest. You know what I mean? With
the friends and family, I don't think, no, I never really went out with people much anyway.
And when I did, it was only over the telephone if we spoke. And if we did go out to be like once a
quarter or something, very rare. So I remember you said at the start of our conversation that you
were surprised that, you know, you thought you couldn't, you could do without the contact and
you now find that you need it. Do you think that will change how you approach things when we are
allowed to interact with people again? I think I won't change how I approach things, but I think
I'll appreciate more when I am with people, when I'm not always wanting to be there or there's times
when I'm thinking, God, I wish I could just work from home. I've become more aware of how sometimes
you just need to be around people sometimes, because sometimes just being with a person and
having a positive conversation in person can just make you feel positive. You can come back.
So there's times I'll go out for a meeting, say at 10 o'clock in the morning, and we don't have our
offices. So I go to another organization, have a meeting. But if that meeting just goes quite well,
or it goes okay, or a point of view you've expressed has been understood or respected,
you go home and think about yourself, you know, and you've broken the deal by being out. So when
you do come home and do admin, just that hour or two out makes a big difference to your well-being
when you come back, because you've had some interaction. And I think it's made me more
appreciative of that. And I think I've done a lot of self-reflection. And I do sometimes wonder,
now with hindsight, when I keep saying I don't need people, I don't need people,
maybe I do need people, maybe I've always needed people. Maybe the problem has been for me,
as somebody who was non-verbal for years and had a lot of problems with my autism and Asperger's,
maybe I've just learned or I've been forced in a position where I was socially isolated so much,
that it just became the norm. And I was out of the loop so much that it became my new normal.
And maybe with hindsight, it's not that I don't need people. Maybe with hindsight,
it is more the fact that I've just lost the ability to know how to deal with,
to work with people. And I've lost the ability to know what I've lost out on.
Mm-hmm. That's an interesting viewpoint. I suppose we've touched on this a little bit,
but do you think it's affected your well-being, being either locked out or at least
physically distancing from people? I think it's definitely affected my well-being in terms of
the overload of information. So I'm not just doing my job, but there's constant emails,
constant chats, follow-up actions. It's definitely done that. That makes me more aware of being on
the autism spectrum, being different to my peers. That makes me doubt myself more. So I think there's
definitely been all that going on from a selfish point of view. I think absolutely that has
certainly affected me. I think I've got away with it more than most people in the grand scheme of
things. I've actually been very, very lucky, luckier than the vast majority of people I'd say.
But yeah, it really has impacted for those reasons. Yeah, I'd say for those reasons.
So you're talking to me today from your sofa. Do you have a workspace at home?
I have an office in my house upstairs, and the internet's rubbish. So I end up sitting on the
sofa and doing work there. The problem is I always used to just work all day anyway,
so I didn't really have much of a social boundary. I think now it's even less so with me working from
home because I'm constantly working, whereas before, at least if you're on the train,
going somewhere, you know, you might have 10 minutes to yourself to think, or what have you.
Now I'm not even doing that really. You might break for something to get back. So you end up
doing a lot more hours. Productivity's massive. Has it changed your relationship with your
home and your living area? Do you see it now as one thing, or was it always like that?
I think for me it was always like that anyway because even when I used to come home,
when I did go to meetings, I would still sit down and do loads of works and send emails out.
I think work's my hobby as well, which is very tragic. But I think it is. And so actually when
I come home in an evening, when my hours are done, I'll put the telly on in the background
and what have you because I like that feeling of being at home. But I can't just sit and watch
the television anyway. I'd have to be doing something. So in that respect, no, I don't think
it's made much of a difference. So do you talk to anyone at the moment, like a friend or maybe a
family member, about not just the pandemic but everyday life? No, I don't think I do, to be honest.
I talk to staff mostly and that's on everyday work stuff or I help them with their problems. But
no, very rarely, to be honest. I speak to my parents once a week online because they've now
moved back to the northeast of England, interestingly, and they did it in the middle
of the pandemic. So I'm literally isolated now. I just live on my own, which doesn't seem to affect
me at the minute for health reasons they need to be up there. But no, I don't really know.
There's a lady called Yvonne Boxall who used to do my job in the past before we give it to somebody
with lived experience. And I check in with her now and again if I'm worried. So I say once a week,
I call her and I check in with her and that's normally about, is this normal? Is this normal?
Is this normal? So if somebody behaves in a certain way I don't understand, I check out with Yvonne
and it's like, is that because I've got autism? Is that because they know I'm different? And she's
sitting there, what's happened to me all the time? So that's the kind of stuff I check out. And
Warrie, is it about Yvonne that makes you feel comfortable talking to her? I think Yvonne gets me
and very few people do. The amount of psychologists and counselors I've had over the years and
yeah, I'm very complicated like that. But I think it's because she knows my job.
We get on well anyway because we just see things very similarly in terms of the third sector.
And I think over a period of time she's been able to get to know me. I think as well the fact that
she comes from a learning disability background as a support worker. She was a special education
teacher and all that. I think there's a mixture of all that really means that she's more
insightful and understanding of my needs than a lot of people would be. So would you
would you view her as a friend or maybe a former colleague? I know the distinction can sometimes
be difficult to make because you know we spend most of our time with our colleagues and often
they become friends. But how would you view Yvonne in that kind of way? Isn't that a brilliant
question? And you might think why? Because you know what? I've never thought of that.
Do you know I never call anybody a friend and I don't even know. I guess it's a friendship I
suppose. I never think of it as a friendship. I just think of it as this is a I'll not swear
because obviously we're all recorded but I think of it as just one of the very few people in the
world that don't get on my nerves. I don't think of it as a friendship although actually I would
reciprocate and I would do anything for her if she wanted to and I'm fond of her so maybe it's a
friendship. You know I don't think I understand what a friendship is and maybe I've got friendships
and don't even know I've got them. I know there's lots of people who call me their friend and I
think oh that's nice but I'm not necessarily sure if I'm a friend back. It's you know.
How would you view then I presume you're on Facebook. You know the term friend is used
quite loosely on there to describe people you're connected to. Would you describe any of them as
friends or just I don't know connections? Yeah I would see them as associates as people we know
through people first. I use it more as a work platform. Some people call me their friend and
then I give them a lot of emotional support in the evenings which isn't really a reciprocal
relationship really. It's more me being there to listen to them and speak to them which I'm happy
to do. So they would see me as a friend. I don't necessarily see them as friends you know. Interestingly
enough I just see them as people who have asked me for help and I help them because that's my nature
but they would probably be devastated at that because they would see me as a friend.
So with Yvonne do you listen to her concerns or you know does she chat to you about things
that are going on? She does. It's mostly mine to be honest. Not from a selfish point of view but
she's back to work all the time. She's to work for us and I'll give her the updates what's happening
and then I'll run something past her. But yeah we talk about her too. I'd say it's about 25% of Yvonne,
75% me I'd say. But I do ask about it and I do check in and I ask how her family are and all
the rest of it and I've given her emotional support at times. Mostly it's me but I don't phone all the
time from the you know I phone as I guess I do phone as a friend. I phone when I think about it.
I phone as a how are you every Sunday or something. Sometimes I phone and say God I'm really sorry
Yvonne I'm not sure what to do can I have your advice? But mostly it's a catch-up thing and I
think because we both come from the one thing we've got in common is we both work for all Wales
people first. So I guess it always comes back down to work for that reason more than anything.
And do you I know we're getting inside your topic but do you think
if a time comes where you leave your current position you would stay in touch with your
colleagues as friends? I think so yeah I'm not sure. I think Yvonne maybe I've got a funny
feeling I'll probably lose contact with everybody else when I think actually when I think about it.
And strange thing if I went to say work in a factory or do something different
I would be completely isolated. It's funny it's because I do my job and because of the nature of
the job other people learning disabilities then contact me and they want to spend time with me
and I think that's where my social validation comes from and I think if I went to an ordinary
everyday job I would be so isolated and I'd have no purpose left when I think about it.
When I think about it the more I think about it this job although it doesn't give you know
although I don't maybe distinguish friends the way other people distinguish friends
actually it's because of this job that people want to speak to me they know who I am they want to
chat with me they invite me to stuff so all my social validation comes through this job and the
nature of what this is. And so as that validation you felt changed since having to do it online
I know you talked earlier about doubting your abilities. No I think now people want because
people are lonely and they're isolated in the lockdown they want to talk more so in the past
when people might want to chat people want to chat a lot more now because they want somebody to talk
to and I'm there and I'm happy to talk so I say now it's increased it's increased again and because
there's a lot of information that we feed to Welsh Government about members experiences members are
more likely to reach out now and say Joe can I tell you something can I tell you what's going
on for me so yeah. You mentioned that your parents have recently moved back to the North of England
how did you feel when they told you? It's really interesting it was my idea funny enough
not because I was trying to get rid of them but ironically I'm going to be honest look they annoy
me at times and I feel terrible for it because they love me to bits and if anything happened
they'd be the first there for me but I was just aware my dad's having health problems more and
more with cancer and different things and he's getting treated my mom can't cope with anything
I mean literally can't cope with a thing and there's no way she can cope we're looking after
me dad and I was just aware that as much as they love living in Wales and I love living in Wales
they're not really happy they're not miserable but they were never as happy as they could be
they missed their grandchildren growing up so I said to them look you know what you'd be better
off up there because you would see my new nephew who's just been born they missed the other four
growing up they're in their late teens early 20s now there's a new one born and if my dad has any
crisis or any health problems my sister's there to support me mom and be there for them so I suggested
it and they were over the moon because they'd actually thought about this for a bit themselves
but didn't want to leave me in the lurch and I said well no I'll be all right we've got video
software we can talk we can still keep in touch but actually it's better for you it's better for
you there's nothing for you here now it's better for you to move forward so that's how that happened
so yeah yeah do you do you notice any difference the fact that they're in the north of England
compared to when they were maybe up the road with you isn't it really interesting but not a
not a difference at all I'm a cool person but no not at all I still talk about football and I'll
check the house for them um because they haven't sold it yet they're living with me sister's house
um but no it's like nothing's changed really and and so when things return to normal will you see
them as often as you used to then? via video I will yeah and I'll go and visit them for
Christmases and stuff which would be nice this Christmas is obviously a write-off it seems to be
but I'll go and visit them for the summer for my birthday for Christmas it'll be lovely that
because I'll go to see the northeast again I'll have somewhere to stay um so yeah I'll do that
but I would say in that respect I guess I would see them just as much as I used to see them
um sorry go on Joe I was going to say in the past it would come safer to visit my house I
didn't visit them that often because I don't drive or anything and it's easy for them to get here
so I guess it would still be once a week but on video instead of once a week in person
and did am I right in thinking they had a dog oh yes yes um Tigger yes Tiggs now I think I
spoke last time about how I could really relate to him and I gave him a hug and I was always
squeezing Tigger when he got put down last November would you believe oh I'm sorry to hear that
yeah it was an interesting one because and this is where my emotions got very very strange
and I don't know if it's an autism logic thing or whether I'm just cold but I love Tiggs and every
time I saw him I couldn't resist squeezing him and kissing him and all the other stuff but when he
was put down my mum and dad were in tears we all went to the vet and what have you he had cancer
he had to get put down but I was just so logical about it all and I thought well
if we let if we don't do the procedure now in a month or two's time they reckon he could die
in real agony in real discomfort so I thought well actually let's celebrate his life let's
celebrate the love we give him and what he gave back for us but we have a wonderful gift because
we can end this for him now we have control of the situation and we can put him out of his misery now
not many human beings get that opportunity human beings in the same position would just have to
die in agony we're in a position to to control this for him and I'm not saying when I got home
I didn't feel a kind of sickening knot in my stomach but for me it was almost like he was there
now he's not there and it was that that black and white even though what you know I think about him
a lot and I think about squeezing him a lot and I think about hugging him a lot I don't kind of
feel the need to burst into tears the way my parents do and so would it be fair do you miss
him and everything he gave you or is it just you miss what he was able to give you in terms of
you know squeezing him and and affection and things it's really strange you know I'm very
fond of him and I have fun thoughts of him but I don't miss him do you would you like if your
parents got another dog do you think you would be as attached to that dog as you are as you were
yeah I'd be silly with him I'd be absolutely daft yeah we had a Yorkshire Terrier before him and I
was the same with him it's weird I get I'm crazy about them when they're around and I love them and
I can't leave them alone but then when they're gone it's like my brain just thinks oh they're
gone and it doesn't see the logic in crying or getting upset about it I don't know if that's an
autistic thing or what but it's just logic it's like oh they're gone now oh it's interesting
and so have you have you entertained the idea of maybe getting a dog yourself
yeah well funny enough I did and then I thought because I live on my own especially my parents
have gone because I stay away overnight at times there'd be nobody there for the dog so I thought
maybe I better not do that I did think about getting a cat I'm not a massive fan of cats but
they reckon there's a breed of cat who are quite like dogs who are affectionate but because they
don't need so much attention I thought we'd be getting two cats so they could keep each other
company and I could leave a litter tray for them and food when I go out I did consider that for a
bit but I think the practically I'm not sure whether I could but yeah I'd love a dog really
ideally I'm just not sure how fair it would be with me being living on my own so sorry did you
say you had a cat oh sorry no I considered having a cat all right sorry and I thought if I considered
getting two cats then they could keep each other company and if I did go out somewhere it wouldn't
be so so bad it'd be cruel even a dog but with cats that have got company and they've got their
food they're more likely to cope because I think dogs always need that hug and that reassurance and
pardon me so I mean one of the areas we're talking about with people is around physical intimacy but
I suppose how have your feelings on that changed since lockdown it really hasn't you know I'm not
kidding you one of the things I've done in the evenings I've been I've been watching box sets of
things and I never saw shameless ever I knew about I never saw it so I was watching shameless and
it's an interesting one because when there's sex scenes and stuff and it's like a sexy thing I get
attracted to it you know what I mean I get kind of I get turned on by it by one of an expression
but it still fascinates me that this is actually real that it's done and I know that it's one
thing for me to think it but I would never ever make that connection still with oh I
I'm attracted to this person why don't I see this through why don't I see for one of the better
words why don't I see if I can get it on with them and see if we can do this and when I watch
things like shameless okay it's exaggerated and it's over the top but you actually think
but you actually think oh people actually do have sex and people actually do do this stuff
and this is real and I'm like wow and that makes me question myself again why am I different why
am I cool why am I this and then I just seem to forget that this stuff happens and I still
find it fascinating that everyday respectable people in society who might get embarrassed if
people mention sexual things at the same time actually have sex are not embarrassed about that
but yet don't like talking about it it's yeah so long short answer no it
still hasn't changed still and I even think people I know females I know who I get on quite well with
I think what would it be like to be their boyfriend I wonder what it would be like this
and the other and there's no feeling inside there's no other than oh that's strange it just
doesn't seem logical you know I see boyfriends and girlfriends who just met each other madly
in love and I think well how can you be madly in love with a complete stranger I don't know
so when things return to normal what what would you be looking forward to doing
first that perhaps you can't do now you know what's really interesting is in a strange way
nothing would change for me I'd be looking forward to getting on with the business this is a
terribly terribly square answer but I'd be looking forward to getting on with the business plan that
we were funded by Welsh Government to do which meant going out and doing outward things my biggest
inconveniences were having to find other ways to do things that were meant to deliver outside
I guess like this project for a certain extent I imagine you're imagining you're expecting to
interview me in person via video or what have you or sound recorder and we're doing it via zoom
it's more I want to get back to doing what we plan to do in the business plan I think
straightforward as that and do you think things will go back to how they were before do you think
things will have changed slightly I on my instinct is that 2021 is a write-off I hate to see it I've
got a feeling that's already gone I think 2022 it will be back to normal in terms of coronavirus
being safe but I think there will be differences in this experience that people will incorporate
so I think there'll be certain other organizations who might also close their offices and think well
actually we can work from home I think there'll be some other people who see the benefits of social
video media interfacing and interviews I think there'll be an element of that
yeah I think there'll be lessons learned in that respect
what has all of this period you know COVID coronavirus whatever you want to call it what
has it meant to you I think for me it's exactly I think what's really interesting is and I'm coming
back to a political work situation here but what's really interesting is you know in the
work that I do we've talked about coronavirus and the unfair impact on people with learning
disabilities and what have you but I think what this has really shown to me is that
coronavirus is not the problem coronavirus just exacerbates an injustice that was already been
there anyway in terms of choice control people making decisions for other people without
concluding them and the mortality problems for people learning disabilities that were there before
they're the same mortality problems under COVID is the COVID hasn't caused
hasn't caused the inequalities and the inequalities were already there and I think
what it's taught me more than anything is again whenever there's a crisis of any type
it is the most vulnerable people who are always going to be affected first
I don't know if that's the right answer to give in terms of me personally but I think it again it
comes back to down to my job and my work it just refocuses this idea of the injustice the social
injustice
and so do you have any like concerns about the next two months I think winter is going to be a
really really difficult time for you personally or in terms of work um personally and work
yeah personally no personally I'm looking forward to it I've got a new settee coming
after I wrecked this one and I'm looking forward to having a Christmas and I'm looking forward to
switching my brain off because I really need to do that because it's obsessive anyway and
it's thinking and it's whatever um work-wise yeah I think I think winter is going to be a
terrible time for people with learning disabilities in lots of ways um there's going to be more
inequalities obviously the potential isolation the day centres still aren't open um in some cases
I think the longer it goes on the harder it is to tolerate and and and to keep up to date with so
yeah I think winter is going to be a really tough time for people with learning disabilities even
tougher than it's been so far and so do you think there's any positive things that have come out of
all all of the last seven months I think there's been a lot of positives isn't that a strange thing
I think one of the things we're seeing is as much as our members people learn disabilities
in some ways have suffered a lot of negativity in some ways they've also been more
more involved in their local communities because local communities who have often kind of shied
away from people with learning disabilities because they've kind of rallied around and
they've tried to get uh make sure everybody in the community's got food and what have you
I think it's actually meant people learn to be more involved in the community than maybe they
were before some of our members have actually helped local councils with litter collection
and different stuff they've been involved in that respect I think the increase in digital literacy
of people with learning disabilities has vastly increased and I think it would have been more of
a challenge to do this in non-covid times I guess as I was saying before they've been forced to have
to do it necessity is the mother of invention and all that so their digital literacy has increased
we've saw real leadership as well there have been some members who become real leaders who've been
there for other people who've done online events and quizzes to help other people they become real
self-advocates real champions they've had their voice heard so there's been a lot of positives
actually I think I think no doubt about that and you mentioned Christmas um what will you do
at Christmas now absolutely nothing which is I'm gonna love it's gonna be bizarre I'll have my
house done all beautiful ready for Christmas and I'll have it all spic and span I'll have my new
sofa and I might play the PlayStation and I'll just have a very sedate non-thinking few days
and that to me would be bliss will you see anyone or talk to anyone via the internet
my mom and dad probably I'll say well definitely more than likely I'll say hello to on video
chats and what have you and new year um but that would be it I'd imagine
and you're fine with that oh absolutely no definitely I can hear how I'm sounding when
I'm saying this but yeah it's uh it's bliss for me I think part of that just because my brain's
constantly overloaded um I've been looking at stuff because I'm always trying to second guess
who am I who am I and I think I fit into this thing called the highly sensitive person
which I've seen online and I think the volume and the is turned up I've got such a rich inner life
and the volume of my thoughts in the world is so high that um I think one of the reasons I live
and think the way I do isn't just somebody with autism although this could be part of it too I
think it is because the volume's turned up and I need so much downtime and switch off time to to
exist that where other people might be absolutely driven to distraction for me it's just like
somebody needing a nap it needing to disengage how have you found shopping for food during all of
this I'm laughing because I got done for shoplifting last week that story it's hilarious um
uh five long story short fine it was it was a problem at first because I couldn't go to
supermarkets that didn't drive and my dad couldn't get me to supermarkets or anything like that
because of he had health concerns as well and in them days you know weren't meant to mix households
and all that so I had to get a taxi when I had to do a supermarket run and that was more of a pain
and it was an inconvenience and I had to pay for for taxis the uh I the shoplifting thing was an
accident it was last week um I went to the supermarket thought I'd done the chip and
pin on the machine long story short and right in front of an armed policeman who was behind me I
just walked out my shopping and this stopped me and I explained it it was all sorted it was all fine
so I think I'm get definitely getting absent-minded as well um yeah and how do you
feel about the face masks oh I hate them I really do um I just find them so hot and uncomfortable
I mean I you know I use them and I and I obey the rules and one of those people and I would never be
irresponsible I'm not going to panic over Covid if I get it I get it and if I've got to die I'll die
you know and I know it's a terrible thing to say but the point I'm trying to make is I would never
break the rules and I would always follow the rules for other people's safety and well-being
but I'm not one of those people who was going to panic about it either life too short I'm just
going to get on with it and do my best um I hate the mask because it's red hot it steams me glasses
up and after a few seconds I find it hard to breathe so yeah real real inconvenience and I
keep forgetting to bring them to the shops and I've got to keep coming back and getting them
and how do you feel when you see other people wearing it have you communicated with anyone
wearing a mask I haven't but when I first saw people wearing masks to my shame I don't know
in the supermarkets I remember thinking you fool what are you doing this is before with mandatory
and everything and I thought well come on that's over the top isn't it um maybe that was foolish
of me maybe that was ignorant of me with hindsight now um now I just see it as a necessary thing a
necessary evil to be fair at that time as well I think you know in Wales it was advised that
there's no evidence for masks as well there was no need for you to wear them you know that was the
official advice then to be fair to myself but but no I don't really think twice about them
is it do you find it um difficult if you were to communicate with someone you couldn't see their
mouth so they're you know half of their face or would it bother you no it just bothered me to be
honest in some ways it's it's it's socially easier because you know in terms of um it's less
sensory in part when I say if I don't see people's mouths and because I don't see the
expressions on their faces I don't then have to overreact in terms of did they mean this
did they mean that did they mean the other I can just take the words for what as long as they're
clear enough I can just take them at whatever their word is and how about the the two meter
thing in shops um how have you found trying to follow that I've been all right with that I found
it more inconvenient than anything but I'm aware we have to do it um if anything I get more ratty
at the fact that it means that the queues are like sometimes really long or they were long
and I'm one of those people I get really impatient because I just want to get on
go to the shops get back and do what I want to do so I'm more affected by my own impatience and
the fact that I can't get on and do stuff the way I want to do it but but I obey it and there's no
issues with that it's more of a selfish thing really um and do you currently or
understand the rules have you always understood the rules of the as they have been announced
do you know what's really weird here and I'm going to be really honest with you
I've never really understood them I know what the rules are but I can't honestly say I've always
known why we have to do it I know it's a thing called covid and I know it keeps us safe I've
had such little interest it's really weird and I think this is where it goes back to me living in
my own bubble I know this thing called covid I know people could get ill I know people could die
and it's very serious and in order to stop that happening you've got to do x y and z so I do x y
and z I play the game but do I know why I'm doing x y and z exactly for whatever individual reason
probably not have you ever found the rules themselves confusing or pretty clear to follow
I find them confusing just from the point of view that they're so contradictory a lot of them are
guidance they're not necessarily rules they're open to interpretation they're changing then
you've got the communication from Wales and Scotland the fact that it's such a big big issue
and you can't hide from it I get overloaded by that and I think that's part of the reason why I
kind of just switch off to it and my attitude is just tell me what I've got to do and I'll do it
but not necessarily fully understanding exactly why
So I think that's about it Joe unless there's anything else that you think you may have missed
talking about do anything you wanted to say no I think that's it really I think the main thing is
it's just my lesson the big big thing I've learned as I said before it's just I guess I do need
people even if I didn't think I did I think that's been a big learning curve for me in a big lesson
yeah and will that and will the fact that you now realize that change how you go about things
I think so I think what it will do is I think my well-being will get better as well I think
like I say even going out just to another organization in Cardiff for a meeting for an
hour or two and coming back breaks of the day makes you feel better about yourself I think those
mornings when you get up and you're not always motivated especially in a cold morning to go to
a meeting in the morning or why we're having this meeting it'll make you realize well the
alternative is remember there was a time Joe when you were in the house 24 7 you know
Well thank you very much Joe I'm going to stop recording now brilliant
if I how do I do it oh no I think it just keeps recording till we stop the call actually
stop recording here we are